We're talking Reynolds Price.
If there's anything you want to change, fix it, okay?
And this is how I conclude this long opening chapter.
Milton was in his early 40s, and I was in my early 50s when we both underwent a physically devastating illness.
And in both our lives, the experience led to some kind of mysterious renewal of good work, he explained.
Open quotes again.
Milton wrote his best books after he lost his sight.
I have written 10 books since I had cancer.
You could probably up that now to a few more, right?
Yeah, about 13 now.
Okay.
And it represents some of the very best work I have ever done.
And this is the first time we introduce this coming up here.
My copy of Paradise Lost once belonged to Deborah Milton Clark, the daughter who took Milton's dictation after he went blind.
Nick, her name has an E on the end, by the way.
Yes, I have it here.
You know, there was a novel written about someone who just recently read a student showed it to me, yeah.
I didn't have a chance to read it, but I was, I said, Jesus, this is very fortuitous for me, but the daughter who took Milton's dictation after he went blind.
And then this is, I love this quote.
For me, it was like the apostolic succession.
I was touching the hand that touched the hand.
And then you had a third hand that touched the hand.
And I assume that that hand is with a capital H. How would you prefer that I do this?
Would you have two hands or three hands?
I was touching the hand.
This is what I have here.
I was touching the hand that touched the hand that touched the hand with a capital H. So what we would have is you are touching Deborah's hand who touched Milton's hand who touched the hand of God.
And I think Milton genuinely believes that.
I mean, he really virtually says his hand is worked by the hand of God.
But yeah, I think you could capitalize the H. And use the three hands.
That'd be fine.
Okay, good.
It's done.
Terrific.
Thank you.
The title of this chapter is Touching the Hand.
I don't explain what this means until you get to the very end, and it's about an 80-page chapter.
Okay, now let's talk about this remarkable statement here, this book.
I'm looking at the dates here, and next week you observe the 10th anniversary, don't you?
May 2.
May 30th.
Right, yeah.
I was getting close to entering the hospital at about this point 10 years ago.
I guess the diagnosis was on the 30th, and the first surgery was about the second or third of June, something like that.
The dates are in the book are correct.
I forgot.
Right.
But is this more or less, I mean, is this a 10-year kind of a thing?
Is that what occasions?
That's very much part of it, yeah.
I didn't want to even think about writing it until I felt I was, you know, far enough into a recovery to
to make anything, I might say, significant.
I mean, to make the kind of book I might want to write possible.
I mean, I could have written a book that says I am writing this book as I am approaching my deathbed, but luckily that isn't the kind of book I wound up having to write.
I got closer and closer to the 10-year anniversary, I really felt like, gee, that would be a lovely round figure if I make it that far.
And I remember when I handed in the TypeScript, or actually, the first book I handed in on computer cassette, on computer disc, and wherever it said 10 years in the text, I left blanks.
I said, I'll fill in the 10 when I'm really close enough to really believe it's going to happen.
So I didn't really put in all the tens until we were in the last stages of the proofs.
But, you know, ten years, six months.
I love the poems that I think that you use at the end of the book.
Was that part of the scheme from the beginning?
No, it wasn't.
I just started writing the text and then realized that
from the time I was given the diagnosis onward that the only thing that I wrote for virtually five or six months in it, and the things that I wrote were occasional short autobiographical poems, just some little short thing that I could write down in a matter of a few minutes.
And I started quoting a few of those in the text, and then I began to think, you know, there are other poems here that come earlier and later that really might be interesting for a reader to read because they
As I say, I think that my unconscious mind knew long before I did that something very gravely wrong was going on in my body and was giving me strange dreams and strange kind of, you know, omens about it.
But I couldn't see those omens in the work until I actually knew what was wrong with me and could look back over the work and see that this kind of dark music had been building up.
You give this disease a name, too.
I mean, you actually, it becomes a being, doesn't it?
Yeah, very quickly, when, as soon as my surgeon told me that, he said it's about 10 inches long, the tumor is about 10 inches long, he said it's about the size of a pencil, the thickness of a pencil.
Your whole spinal cord is about the thickness of your thumb, and this is, he said it's a gray, grayish tissue in the middle of the pink tissue of the cord.
For some reason, just instantly into my mind, there leapt the image of an eel.
When I used to live in England and go to the market, I mean, you very seldom see eels for sale in a normal American supermarket, but in the English markets of the 1950s, I would see eels lying out for sale, and they were these strange, slick, sort of snaky-looking, you know, dark gray creatures, and slightly repugnant-looking.
So I really just suddenly saw the tumor as being that, and from then on I thought of it as the eel that was inside my spinal cord.
But by giving it a name and making it, in your mind at least, making it a living thing, I wonder if, is this a battle?
I mean, you teach Milton.
I mean, you have to ask the question, is this a battle between good and evil, or is it a battle between health and disease?
I think for me it was more complicated than that.
Even though I indulged in for some time, I practiced at that point very new techniques of mental imaging, trying to imagine the immune cells of my own body attacking the tumor.
I also somehow...
I never got to the point of the near hysteria that I've heard some cancer people describe when they really say that they just almost took up a knife and tried to cut it out themselves.
I didn't have that sense that this is something deeply horrifying just below the surface of my skin.
I certainly didn't love it and didn't want it to stay, but I had much more this sense of
almost trying to coax it out of there or persuade it out of there.
And I suppose I was a little suspicious because many of the doctors said to me that the particular kind of tumor that I had was very frequently congenital.
That is that I would have brought it with me out of the womb and that it took 51 years to build up enough mass to manifest itself.
So I also kind of had this strange feeling that it was a lifetime companion of mine.
that had suddenly gotten the upper hand and that I had to get control over, though not necessarily in a violently destructive way.
Are you familiar with, I mean, there are a couple of books that have been recently issued.
One is by Sherwin Newland, How We Die.
I've read reviews of that, but I have not seen it.
And, I mean, it's really quite a remarkable book.
But, again, very...
What's the phrase I'm looking for?
I mean, it really does detail the demise.
But then there's another by Richard Selzer where he describes his near-death experience, and it's called Raising the Dead or something like that.
I haven't read his yet, but he's reviewing my book in this Sunday's L.A.
Times.
Well, it's a perfect guy to review it.
Have you seen it yet?
No, I haven't.
They just sent it to me yesterday, and it's a very good review.
He does have one interesting, Demura, which I suppose we could expect from a physician.
He's unhappy that I'm so...
that I attacked the frozen oncologist.
He tries to explain how many great doctors there are who are cold and are of necessity cold, which I don't believe for one instant, but it's a very good review
You know, if I were in a situation of assigning it for review, I mean, he would spring immediately to mind, I think.
Does he live in Boston?
He lives in New Haven.
They both live in, in fact, both Newland and Selzer live in New Haven.
And I actually have his address someplace if you, I mean, if you want it.
I don't have it.
I think I will just drop him.
If you just give me your fax number or something, maybe I'll send it to you.
Yeah, my fax number is 919-
Okay, when I dig the thing up, I'll send it down to you.
I guess, you know, my wife read this.
She grabbed it for me, and she... I mean, I read it myself, but I didn't have to because she kept telling me, you know, about these things.
Did she like it?
She loved it.
I mean, moved by it profoundly.
Right.
She told me that... I remember she said that one scene where you...
where you're told to go home and write the great American novel.
Yeah.
And he's already done that.
Son of a bitch.
You know, he's already done that.
Let's get on to it.
My cousin said he's already done that.
She was along.
That is so good.
Yeah.
I guess...
What strikes me is there's absolutely no self-fity here whatsoever.
I mean, you conclude by, I forget the precise use, I've led a mainly happy life.
It's really true.
You must have felt that when we were together.
I mean, I remember what a good laughing time you had.
We had a good time.
Well, you know, I had these very buoyant,
sort of vivacious parents who had terrible amounts of trouble in their lives and yet maintained a wonderful sort of appetite for life.
My brother is the same way, and I just, I don't know, I think part of that is just native stock.
You know, you just, you're either born depressed or you're not, and thank God we weren't.
And we weren't born as sort of, you know, hyperactive or loudly rambunctious people, but I think people with a strong appetite for existence and for other human beings.
That served me.
God knows there were really horrendous days when, A, I thought I was just about to die or almost wished that I were dying.
But those days were rare and they didn't last long.
I mean, you know, there was never a period of more than a few hours at a time when I just really felt like, you know, the jig is up.
How important, I mean, I know how important it is, but maybe you can give me a...
Pardon me, a quote on this is the work, your work in all of this.
I think the work was crucial.
I think it was not the only crucial factor.
I think the love of my family and friends and strangers and students was crucial.
I think the marvelous skill of my physicians, though some of them seemed to me a great deal less than humane, but their technological skills were immaculate.
I think...
You know, my very unconventional religious faith was crucial to me.
And I think the fact that after a five-month period of deep depression, right after the radiation ended, once I got through that, then I was back
tumble of work that, you know, really hasn't stopped yet, thank God.
And so I would say that work was one of those, you know, three to five most heavily significant factors in the fact that I'm a live ten years after a
by more than about a year and a half or two years.
Now, many of us feel that Kate Vaden is certainly one of the great... I mean, you've got so many books, but...
That's such a really unusually wonderful book.
I love Cave Made.
I'll have to give it a hand to admit, yeah.
Was this informed in any way, do you think?
I mean, I know you were working on it prior to the illness.
Yeah.
I wondered, was the final product...
Was it influenced at all by this experience?
I'm sure it must have been.
I had literally, by an amazing kind of coincidence, I had written literally the last sentence of part one of the novel, and I knew there were going to be two other parts.
And I wasn't able to begin writing part two until five months after that discovery of the tumor.
And I did not have, as I never have really, not since my first novel anyway, I've never had a very firm outline of where a novel's going.
I generally have some reasonably vague sense of where it's going to end, but the route that I take to get there is pretty much a matter of day-to-day invention.
So I'm sure that the events of my life in those months
must have deeply affected what happens to Kate Baden in Books 2 and Books 3.
I mean, she does, for instance, in Books 3, wind up having cancer herself.
Though I must say, a number of other people in my family have had cancer before I did, so it wasn't as though I had to wait for my own search to discover the existence of that threat to human life.
But yeah, I'm sure many, many things in Kate are the result of...
of my own experience, though I couldn't put a finger on anyone and say that definitely came from, you know, the summer of 1984.
when I was going through hell.
There are any number of ways, I mean, this book can be read by any number of people.
Of course, those of us who read you for beautiful writing appreciate it.
But I'm wondering now if you reach a whole other group of readers out there who need the kind of... Well, I certainly try to.
I mean, this is...
It's literally the first book I ever wrote that anybody ever asked me to write.
Really, I didn't know this.
Okay.
Any writer, obviously, as you well know, any writer, if you get a parking ticket, you think this is going to turn up in my work someday.
So obviously when I got cancer and became paraplegic, I thought, well, my God, if I survive for any significant period of time, obviously this is going to inform my work in some way.
But I didn't imagine how and couldn't.
So I got down to, I guess, two years ago when you and I met in Cambridge when I was doing that, you know, that blue Calhoun tour.
And I literally, I started in Boston.
I started in Washington, went to Boston.
From then on, I went to 12 more American cities from coast to coast.
I gave about 21 or 22 readings.
um there wasn't a single reading signing that i gave it which somebody didn't come up some stranger didn't come up and say i've just been diagnosed with lymphoma i my sister's just had a mastectomy my father's just had a prostatectomy and they all said to this effect you know for god's sake write something about your experience and i really just thought okay i know what
when I hear one, and I went home, and very soon after, in about 93, began writing the first draft.
It was not an easy thing to do to make myself, you know, trek back through all of that unhappiness, but I wrote a first draft and let it sit for a while.
Showed it to a couple of friends who had been very close to me during that period, and they said, you know, this seems like, I mean, I was just worried that it might be such a private experience that I couldn't communicate it.
They tried to assure me that I had already begun communicating it, so I just kept going and finally wound up with it.
the manuscript that is now published.
I think it was a good decision not to seek out files, for instance.
Selzer, by the way, doesn't look at his files in his book.
No, the only thing I looked at, as I say, is that little three-by-five pocket diary that I kept, which I would just say, you know, temperature so-and-so this morning took so many grams of methadone, haven't felt worse since last Thursday week.
or went to see doctor at 10 o'clock and came home and was in horrible pain all afternoon.
So I just had that little... Yeah, but I mean the official records is what I mean.
Yeah, I reconstructed it around that.
But I think that was a good decision because now it is a subjective...
which is what you want.
I mean, the clinical stuff is for clinicians, I guess.
Well, I'll tell you, I just phoned my home machine this morning, and I had a message on the machine from a resident in surgery at Duke Hospital asking me if I would come to Grand Rounds.
sometime in July and address the surgeon, so I don't know whether they're sharpening up their scalpels to finish me off or what.
God knows I owe my life to, as I said, to some of those great technicians, one or two of whom were very humane men, though I think I survived in spite of a couple of other very inhumane people that I had to be.
Are you a fatalist at all?
A fatalist in any way.
Yeah.
am i yeah i don't strictly believe that everything that happens is you know supposed to happen i'm certainly not a strict calvinist um but um i do certainly you know i've always sensed that my my life had had a kind of meaning and a plan and
I mean, I told you about, you know, my father made the vow to quit drinking when I was born because my mother and I were dying in labor.
And I just always felt like my life had a lot of shape to it.
Especially when you feel that this eel has been with you all my life.
Yeah, in that poem that it's in the book called The Eel, I think of it even as a twin.
It was almost like this little twin that I had in my body.
Looking back now, I mean, can you conceive of your life without this experience?
I mean, is it an essential emolument of your life, I guess, I wonder?
I didn't say it in the book because I was afraid it might look a little soft-headed or chuckle-headed.
But I really do think if you said to me now, Reynolds, here's two buttons, you can press this one and we'll erase the last, we'll rewrite the last three years, the last ten years without the cancer.
I don't think I'd let you press it.
It's such a rich and fascinating experience.
I get goose pimples with that statement.
I think it's true.
I really do.
I say that having already expressed very truthfully what real agonies of pain and fear I lived through in that first three to four years.
You say your father was a hypochondriac.
A terrible hypochondriac.
And you weren't.
I was not.
So I did have, interestingly, I'm not sure whether I mentioned it in the book or not, but a couple, two or three times, he died when I was 21 years old.
He died of lung cancer, and I stayed very close to him while he was dying.
And through the ensuing years from 19...
54 to 84, those 30 years there between his death and my diagnosis, there were three or four occasions when I really got almost panicky with the idea that I had cancer.
I would discover a little lump in my side or a lump in my throat or something and say, this is it.
You're going to die even younger than your father.
I'd always go to the doctor and they'd say, relax, Reynolds, this isn't cancer.
But then one day when I was 51 years old, it was cancer.
And I thought again, I'm going to die younger than my father because I was 51 and he had died at 54.
And you certainly, as you stated to me when we met the last time, the work, in your view, is so much richer and better.
It's certainly very different.
I'd let other people decide whether it's better.
I can say that I've enjoyed writing it more.
I write it more easily.
It comes to me more easily.
And I feel that it's a richer experience.
Like, I assumed that I would have gone.
I mean, I was hardly a slouch.
I had published a book every other year since 1962.
So I was not a sluggard, but I've published, you know, 13 books in the last 10 years.
Wow.
That's taken the speed up rather dramatically.
The writing of poems seemed to be the way you, of course prior to this book, but it seems to be the medium for you to express
um what's happening what's happened with it uh how do you decide whether it should be a poem or an essay or uh you know i'm just wondering thinking out loud here it's not a conscious it's not a decision that's made at a conscious level i think i have literally never sat down and said should this be a story or a poem or the start of a novel i can't ever remember doing that
just something arrives and you know immediately this is a dog and that's a cat and that's a leopard.
So I wrote so many poems around the time of the
early diagnosis, partly because A, my energy was extremely limited, my attention was shattered.
Little bitty short poems of like, you know, 20 to four lines were about all I could manage to do.
Something that would take 20 minutes, maybe 15 minutes, 30 minutes was all I could
make myself sit down and do i also think that this whole experience is filled with imagery though i mean and uh and of course what better way to to uh because i mean this this is a festival of imagery almost and but i've always said i probably said to you before you know my parents were were metaphor factories
I mean, like all Southerners and like all the Irish and American black people, I mean, we think metaphorically in terms of visual images.
So it was something that went way back in my life before I'd counted the yield.
Wow.
Listen, I'm not going to question you about the book because the book speaks so powerfully for itself.
And what I really wanted was to have some nice quotes and to say hello to you again after a couple of years.
Glad to talk to you.
And now let me also say that I'm now writing for...
A number of newspapers.
I have eight newspapers taking my call now.
Great.
And both coasts.
I can just shut this off for a second.
We don't need this on tape.